Trapping an animal is a מלאכת on Shabbos. This מלאכה really needs to be defined. 
What is trapping?
See קופת הרוכליםs introduction to מלאכת שבת it seems as though the מלאכה is only in a situation in which the animal previously had freedom and after you have "trapped it" the animal no longer has freedom.
It may be important to know that the only reference to trapping I see so far is in reference to animals.
What is the definition of freedom?
If the animal is already sick to the extend that it cannot move there cannot be trapping by that animal, it already cannot move.
If one enclosed the animal in a large place this is not considered trapping. 
It seems as though trapping specifically means: the animal had freedom of movemenet and you, the trapper, restricted its freedom of movement.
I must note, however, one interesting Halacha: generally, if the animal is already stuck in a small place there can be no trapping with that animal, as per the definition above, the animal is already trapped. 
There is one exception to this rule, however, if the animal is a dangerous animal even if it found in a small space already, trapping such an animal does cause one to be עובר on the אסור צדה.
It would seem then that we must either have two definitions of trapping, or change our previous definition of trapping.
If the animal is free from human control then bringing the animal under human control is trapping. Although with regard to space the dangerous animal is already "trapped
humans will not come near it because it is dangerous. It is still free from human control. The אסור of trapping, then, still applies to such an animal.
It would make sense that this definition is the only definition of צד. If one traps a small bird inside a big house there is no צד. But why? You are still restricting its movement, granted by a much lesser degree? 
It is possible to explain that the animal does not feel the restricted movement, and מלאכת צד may be related to the אסור of צער בעלי חיים prehaps. It is also possible to explain, without צער בעלי חיים, that the animal simply
needs a certain degree of freedom that is found in nature and by "trapping" the bird in a house that freedom is not restricted. How we define exactly freedom in nature would be left unclear.
It is much easier to explain that צד is really related to the ability of the human to exert control over the animal. Trapping a small bird in a big house does not give humans very much more control over it than they had in nature. It would seem, according to this, that the 
ability to trap the bird in the house so that later on it will be easier to catch the bird and exert control is not צד. Only the immediate ability to exert control with relative ease right now would constitute מלאכת צד.
Immediate control would need to be defined to a science. This may be the reference in the גמרא to מטי ליה בחד שחיה. 
It is possible that this fundemenatal understanding of צד is discussed in the גמרא in the form of an אי נמי. The differene between a ביבר קטן in which צד is מותר and a ביבר קטן in which צד is אסור. This would have to be explored in greater detail.
There is a dicussion in קופת הרוכלים with regard to if the animal rebels, i.e. it will come back to its owner of it will not come back to its owner. It would seem to me that the issue of human control is clearly the topic at hand. If the animal has "rebelled" i.e.
it will not come to its owner automatically there is צד. If the animal has not rebelled it would seem, at first glance, that there is no אסור דאורייתא of צדה. 
The issue of control can also be seen the in the חלוק between a בהמה שלא מרדה and a חיה, עוף, או חתול שלא מרדה. 
It would seem that regading a בהמה even if the animal is somewhat hard to catch it is still domesticated. חיה, עוף, חתול we do not consider being domesticated, or at least if they try to run a little while catching them they do not appear
domesticated enough to allow for צדה. I would like to explain this as follows: domsetication means control. This means there is no צדה with that type of animal. It may be a חידרוש that even if the animal tries to run a little while trying to catch it 
it is not צדה. This may be explained: although it will take some effort to catch it as long as it will not really run away...it knows its owner and will stay close to the owner this is still considered enough control by the owner.

It is unclear to me why their is no אסור צדה מדאורייתא with flies and other insects. 
It must be kept in mind that althought there is no אסור דאורייתא, there is still an אסור דרבנן and one must be careful not to trap insects and flies etc. If one has not intention of trapping the insect he may close a bottle that the insect is found in. It seems the אסור דרבנן is 
only when it is similar to the אסור דאורייתא, מטי ליה בחד שחיה and he has כוונה for צד. It would seem to me that this אסור דרבנן is when one of those תנאים are filled.

Although not specifically mentioned with regard to חיה ועוף, it seems that the real אסור דאורייתא is trapping בידים, not with some sort of net. Grabbing a fish by ones hands, or spreading a net and capturing it on the spot is חייב.
